sandbox-permissions: Document the device fallback mechanism (#478)
flatpak/flatpak-docs: docs/sandbox-permissions.rst

Device access
`````````````
You can provide the following device permissions:

========= ======================================================
``dri``   Direct Rendering Interface. Necessary for GL.
``kvm``   Kernel based Virtual Machine ``/dev/kvm``
``shm``   Shared Memory in ``/dev/shm``.
``input`` Input devices as exposed in ``/dev/input``. This includes game controllers. Since flatpak 1.15.6.
``all``   All devices, including all of the above except ``shm``
========= ======================================================

While not ideal, ``--device=all`` can be used to access devices like
generic USB or webcams.

The ``input`` device permission was introduced in 1.15.6. Adding this
permission will have no effect on prior flatpak versions, and therefor

> prevent using the application as intended. Expecting user to update

Reviewer: This should be a warning

flatpak to the latest version is not possible as some LTS distribution
will never update. We can expect took take 5 years for most users to
be on the correct version and by that time, there will be more

> additions as more granular device permission get added.

Reviewer: I'd just shorten this to a single line: Note that not all distributions or users might not be running latest version of flatpak supporting this feature.

Author: Rephrased.

> Starting flatpak 1.16, there is a device fallback mechanism. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with flatpak 1.16, there is a device fallback mechanism. The
```

device fallback mechanism is meant to specify that a certain device
permission is to be used as a fallback, and therefor, if flatpak knows
about it, it can tighten device access as intended.

Packagers should take great care in considering device permissions and
use the fallback mechanism when available.

In the case where input device access is need you could specify:

.. code-block::

   --device=input

On the command line, with flatpak < 1.15.6, you will get an error. In
the metadata, it will be ignored and the permission will not be
granted. This will make the package non-functional and offer a poor

> user experience.

Reviewer: This seems to be mostly the same as the previous part. I'd add one line of warning for not using the feature then another line for the new fallback

Author: reworked the whole section.

The solution is to use a fallback.

Fallback gets specified with the ``--device`` option like for device
permissions. It starts with ``fallback:`` and then list the
permission, followed by the fallback, separated by a comma. In most
case the fallback will be ``all`` as there is currently no overlap
otherwise.

In the example above, the syntax is as follow:

.. code-block::

  --device=fallback:input,all
  --device=all

> This translate to "grant permission to input device, ``all`` is used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This translates to "grant permission to input device, ``all`` is used
```

as fallback". Effectively, if flatpak understands the ``input``
permission, it will grant ``input`` device access to the application,

> and not grant ``all`` access.

Reviewer: Maybe: "This translates to: grant permission to input device if Flatpak supports it, otherwise fallback to granting ``all`` device access.

Author: that's clearer and shoter.

> This provide two things:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This provides two things:
```

> 1. Grants input device permission only if flatpak understand it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Grants input device permission only if flatpak understands it.
```

2. Grant ``all`` device permission for older version that don't
   understand input. The ``--device=all`` is used for older versions

>    of flatpak. Without it there is no fallback.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this paragraph at all.

Reviewer: Points 1 and 2 seems to be a repeat of https://github.com/flatpak/flatpak-docs/pull/478/files#diff-18c19b89ae08fb958565460168fbaf2464c20e2d0a701f705712c0086d94fc8cR281-R284

Author: I reworded the section.

> The key take away it that the fallback will remove the permission of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key takeaway is that, fallback will remove the permission of
```

Reviewer: What does "remove" here mean? Remove from where? Or is it supposed to be "ignore" like `fallback-x11` and `x11` case in metadata?

Author: ignore seems to be better. Will use that.

Author: yes like fallback-x11 / x11.

> the fallback if all the other permission using it are available.

Reviewer 2: Also having a hard time parsing this.

Reviewer: Is it trying to say that if there is:

```
--device=fallback:input,all
--device=input
```

and Flatpak version supports `--device=input`, the fallback permission will be ignored?

Author: It would be
```
--device=fallback:input,all
--device=all
```

`all` is the fallback here.

This definitely needs a rewrite.

Author: reworded this too

Device access
`````````````
You can provide the following device permissions:

========= ======================================================
``dri``   Direct Rendering Interface. Necessary for GL.
``kvm``   Kernel based Virtual Machine ``/dev/kvm``
``shm``   Shared Memory in ``/dev/shm``.
``input`` Input devices as exposed in ``/dev/input``. This includes game controllers. Since Flatpak 1.15.6.
``all``   All devices, including all of the above except ``shm``
========= ======================================================

.. note::

   ALSA sound devices in ``/dev/snd`` are exposed with the socket
   permission ``pulseaudio``.

While not ideal, ``--device=all`` can be used to access devices like
generic USB or webcams.

Newer permissions like ``input``, meant to avoid using ``all`` will
not work on older versions. Since not all distributions or users might

> be running latest version of Flatpak supporting this feature, it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be running the latest version of Flatpak supporting this feature, it is
```

needed to be able to be compatible with older versions.

Starting with Flatpak 1.16, there is a device fallback mechanism. The
device fallback mechanism is meant to specify that a certain device
permission is to be used with a fallback, and therefor, if Flatpak
knows about it, it can tighten device access as intended and ignore
the fallback.

Packagers should take great care in considering device permissions and
use the fallback mechanism when available.

For example in the case where input device access is need you could
specify:

.. code-block::

   --device=input

.. warning::

   On the command line, with Flatpak < 1.15.6, you will get an
   error. In the metadata, it will be ignored making the package not
   function as intended and offer a poor user experience.

The solution is to use a fallback.

Fallback gets specified with the ``--device`` option like for device

> permissions. It starts with ``fallback:`` and then list the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
permissions. It starts with ``fallback:`` and then lists the
```

permission, followed by the fallback, separated by a comma. In most
case the fallback will be ``all`` as there is currently no overlap
otherwise.

The generic syntax is:

.. code-block::

>    --device=fallback:DEVICE_PERMISSION:FALLBACK_PERMISSION

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   --device=fallback:DEVICE_PERMISSION,FALLBACK_PERMISSION
```

>    --device=FALLBACK_PERMISSION

Reviewer 2: Why is this line necessary?

Author: because otherwise older version of Flatpak will do nothing.

Reviewer 2: Right, this was more of question that the docs should answer because it is not obvious.

Specifying a fallback permission (second line) is required.

> In the example above, the fallback syntax would be as follow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above, the fallback syntax would be as follows:
```

.. code-block::

  --device=fallback:input,all
  --device=all

> This translates to "grant permission to ``input`` devices if Flatpak
> supports it, otherwise fallback to granting ``all`` device access".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This translates to "grant permission to ``input`` devices if Flatpak
supports it and ignore ``all``, otherwise fallback to granting ``all`` device access".
```

> In this case ``all`` is the fallback, and ``input`` the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case ``all`` is the fallback permission, and ``input`` is the device permission.
```
